---
author: Emiliano Travieso
date: 2018-02-18 00:00:00 +0000
linktitle: Pinochet's inequality miracle
title: Pinochet's inequality miracle
weight: 10
menu:
  main:
    weight: 10

---
Economists don't agree about the economics of dictatorships: some claim
that the lack of checks on the executive and the widespread repression
of political voice provide an institutional framework encouraging
rent-seeking and stifling growth, whereas others think that it is
precisely the lack of political accountability to the electorate that
allows for economic policies that make technical sense and are conducive
to growth but would not attain political consensus. Economic historians,
whose job description allows them to focus on cases rather than on
general rules, can point to examples supporting both theses (or
neither). They could also try to reframe the discussion: from a wider
human development perspective the choice between democracy and
dictatorship should not be centred solely on economic growth. After all
if democracy is desirable it's because it makes us freer than other
alternative regimes, not because it makes us rich (though some continue
to argue that). On this post I'd like to focus on the distributional
impacts of a 'Structural Adjustment' economic policy under a dictatorial
regime, looking at the experience of the Latin American poster child for
'free-market' economic reform: Chile under Pinochet.

Throughout the first half of the 20th century, the Southern Cone
economies (Argentina, Chile and Uruguay) had the highest per capita
income in Latin America. Having reaped the benefits of the first
globalisation boom, especially since the late 19th century and up to
the First World War, they also led the region also in terms of
manufacturing output per capita. This, in a context of rising incomes
and massive European immigration, gave rise to strong trade union
movements and early attempts at a welfare state. By the second decade of
the century these three countries had universal male suffrage, and women
were enfranchised before 1950. These developments contrasted with
structurally high levels of asset and income inequality, and led to the
election of candidates who made redistribution a central political
issue. In Chile the government of the Social Christian Eduardo Frei
Montalva (1964-1970) increased public investment in health and
education, passed a land reform act, and encouraged the creation of new
cooperatives and trade unions. The limits shown by some of Frei’s
reformist policies encouraged the growth of more leftist political
parties, who in 1970 won the national elections running together as
Popular Unity (*Unidad Popular*, UP), with a Socialist presidential
candidate, Salvador Allende, and the support of labour trade unions.
Their platform centred on nationalising the mining industry
(particularly copper, which accounted for two thirds of Chilean
exports), the redistribution of income, the intensification of the
agrarian reform already underway, and the improvement of working
conditions, all as part of a 'democratic transition to socialism' – *la
vía chilena al socialismo*.

When Allende came into office the international price of copper was on
the rise, which meant that Chile’s terms of trade were extremely
favourable and that fiscal revenue, linked to the copper industry via
taxation and direct public ownership (about 20% of Chilean government
revenue came directly from copper export production), was also
increasing. Benefiting from that favourable international trade context,
the government succeeded in further increasing public spending (which
rose from c. 30% to over 40% of GDP), virtually achieving full
employment and reducing income inequality. In 1972, remarkably high
volatility in the international price of copper, together with rapidly
increasing government deficit and debt as well as a poor manufacturing
output, led to extremely high inflation levels that reached almost 300%
the following year. Taking advantage of the environment of economic
instability, the Chilean elite supported a coup staged on September 11,
1973 by a group of military high-ranking officers led by Augusto
Pinochet. In the context of intense ideological confrontation brought
about by the Cold War and with the (often explicit) support of the
United States government, the Chilean military regime would remain in
power until 1990. The National Congress was dissolved, political parties
and labour unions were banned, tens of thousands of Chileans were
tortured and killed and hundreds of thousands forced into exile, and the
whole population lost the basic political rights of franchise,
association and free speech. The return of democracy was led by the
Coalition of Parties for Democracy (*Concertación*), an alliance of
centre and centre-left parties, which arose from success in the
referendum against the dictatorship in 1988 and remained in power until
2009.

The series of structural adjustment reforms under Pinochet were designed
by a group of civilian economists: the *Chicago Boys*, Chileans trained
as graduate students in the Department of Economics at the University of
Chicago. In the late 1980s their economic program was hailed as a Latin
American success story: when asked about the ‘Chilean economic miracle’
under Pinochet, Milton Friedman, who had taught the policymakers at
Chicago, claimed that market forces in Chile had simply done 'what Adam
Smith said they would do' and that the true miracle was that a military
junta committed to a program of 'bottom up economics.' Against the
background of Latin America's 'lost decade' (as the 1980s became known
as a result of economic stagnation and a region-wide debt crisis), Chile
boasted rising export values, an average rate of GDP growth of 2.9%
(although with high volatility), and a small but consistent fiscal
surplus during the Pinochet years. Looking at the Chile in a slightly
longer historical perspective, however, the real miracle is how fast
income inequality increased during the dictatorship and how unable
democratic governments have been to engineer a return to pre-Pinochet
inequality levels.

![Inequality in Chile](/static/img/chile.png)

Source: per capita GDP: Montevideo-Oxford Latin American Database
(MOxLAD); Gini: Universidad de Chile, *Encuesta de Ocupación y
Desocupación en el Gran Santiago*, Santiago de Chile, 1964-2009. The
Gini data available for the whole period refers only to the Great
Santiago Area, but due to its population size and importance in the
Chilean economy, it can be considered representative of the country as a
whole.

The richest 20% of households in the greater Santiago area earned
incomes 12 times higher than the poorest 20% when Allende's government
was violently put to an end in 1973. By the time Pinochet left power in
1989 that ratio had increased to 20:1. How did the Chilean dictatorship
manage to so consistently increase already structurally high levels of
inequality? The most convenient answer would perhaps be 'by a systematic
rolling back of the state', but what happened was much closer to a
radical reorientation of the state's part in the economy than to its
withering away. The copper industry remained largely nationalized
(though the government revenue thereof was redirected towards security
and defence), the national government continued to control labour
relations (dismantling unions and preventing strikes), and when the
privatizations of some national companies didn't work out as planned the
dictatorship was quick to re-nationalize them during the economic crisis
of 1982. Friedman's description of Pinochet's Chile as the kingdom of
'bottom-up economics' was, it seems, rather naive. However, the Chicago
Boys did unreservedly apply his teachings to some key sectors: health,
pensions and education were opened to private companies and run (less
explicitly but not less consequentially in the case of higher education)
for profit, in what became one of the dictatorship's most enduring
legacies. The effects the privatization of the provision of public goods
had on inequality were significant: operating in segmented and highly
concentrated markets in a small economy prone to natural monopolies, the
private health institutions, pensions managers and universities have
become powerful economic actors in Chile.

These policies, together with the effects of the dramatic fall of the
international price of copper (which halved during the Pinochet regime),
resulted in something that could be called a 'Chilean miracle':
inequality increased at a much faster pace than output and average incomes,
in a dynamic somewhat reminiscent of pre-modern settings. The rise in
the inequality extraction ratio offers one measure of that process.
Following Milanovic, Lindert and Williamson the inequality extraction
ratio is calculated as the quotient between the Gini coefficient and the
maximum feasible Gini (i.e. the inequality possibility frontier) in a
given economy. The maximum feasible Gini takes a minimum annual
subsistence income of *s*=300 Gheary-Kamis 1990 USD Dollars, and then
calculates the distribution Gini assuming that everyone’s income is *s*
except one individual who gets all the rest: that situation defines the
inequality possibility frontier.

![Inequality extraction ratio in Chile](/static/img/chile2.png)

Source: GDP data from the Montevideo-Oxford Latin American Database
(MOxLAD) and Gini data from Universidad de Chile, *Encuesta de Ocupación
y Desocupación en el Gran Santiago*, Santiago de Chile, 1964-2009. The
benchmarks for Roman Empire, Tuscany, England & Wales, India, United
Kingdom and Germany are from Milanovic, B, P. Lindert, and J.
Williamson, 'Pre-Industrial Inequality'.

Income inequality increased almost everywhere else in Latin America, and
indeed around the world, in the 1970s, so the Chilean trend under
Pinochet should not be surprising. But the resulting inequality *levels*
in the 1980s were extraordinary for a middle-income country, even for a
Latin American one. They also proved persistent: in 2017 Chile was,
together with Uruguay, the only Latin American economy classified as a
'high income country' by the World Bank, and yet in terms of income
inequality it remains, with Brazil, the worst in the region. Latin
American countries are generally much more unequal than expected
according to their income, and Chile since Pinochet (and with no end in
sight) is the most extreme case. When considering the economics of
dictatorships distribution should be focused on as much as growth.

For more on Chilean inequality see [*this
post*](https://pseudoerasmus.com/2015/04/24/chilean-inequality-the-first-globalisation-1870-1914/)
by Javier Rodríguez Weber, translated and annotated by Pseudoerasmus; and
for more on the economics of Latin American dictatorships read [*Joe
Francis on Argentina*](http://www.joefrancis.info/profits-and-terror/).
Stay tuned for ramblings on Latin American economic history, next time
probably about Fray Bentos corned beef.
